---
layout: post
title: DSU/Union-Find with Path Compression Implementation
date: 2025-07-08 19:37 -0700
categories: [Data Structures, Competitive Programming]
Tags: [data structures]
comments: True
---

The Disjoint Set Union/Union-Find with Path Compression data structure, that will be refered to as the Disjoint Set Union with Path Compression (DSU) for the remainder of the article, is an incredibly important tool that has a lot of usages (some even surprise me!).

Essentially, the DSU keeps tracks of elements, you can think of these elements (which can be anything you please but easier to illustrate them in theory and practice as integer values) as children, to one other element in the set, which you can think of as parents - get it? the children belong to their *respective* parents.


You may be wondering, "how does this help me in any way? Why can't I just use a nested list/vector or even nested set implementation and connect it that way? I can check if an element is in a parent's set kinda fast, I think?" Well, let us compare each structure's time complexity.

*Assuming all parent lists are the same size (have the same amount of children) in the worst case.

*n is the number of elements in the whole structure.

| Operation            | Nested List/Vector | Nested HashSet | DSU
|---|---|---|
| Finding an element's/child's parent| θ(Parents*Children) | O(Parents) | O(α(n))
| Checking if two elements are connected | θ(Parents*Children)  | θ(Parents*Children) | O(α(n))
| Grouping two elements together    | ?? | ?? | O(α(n))

?? How would you even do this efficiently lol. I guess you can pass around pointers but it just
gets confusing.

In a Nested List/Vector, it is clear to see that to connect two elements, we have to iterate through both of their parents and add an extra element which may go over the current size, causing a resize. Same with Hashsets, but we are able to find the parent of a child based on O(1) operations for each parent.

Enter the inverse Ackermann function (that little α you might have been confused about). It is an extremely slow growing function - like, really slow, I am taking about basically constant O(1) times here. Effectively, the time complexity decreases everytime you use group two elements together. This is due to a little something called path compression, which just means every time you search for an elements parent, the connections between elements on that path and the parent you just found become direct connections, effectively making lookup times so much faster.

Now that you know how fast DSU's operations are with path compression, lets go ahead and implement it.

## Implementation

```c++
    #include <vector>
    using namespace std;
    struct DSU {
        vector<int> parents;
        // n is the size of the DSU
        DSU(const int& n) : parents(n, -1) {} // negative size indicated a parent, postive values indicate the child's parent
        int find(const int& u) { return parents[u] < 0 ? u : parents[u] = find(parents[u]); } // path compression
        bool connected(const int& u, const int& v) { return find(u) == find(v); }
        void unite(int u, int v) {
            u = find(u), v = find(v);
            if (v == u) return; // no need to connect the an element to itself
            if (parents[u] > parents[v]) swap(u, v); // less if statements
            parents[u] += parents[v]; // add the size (weighted, remember!)
            parents[v] = u; // set parent
        }
    };

```